so how many of you ever been in the cage
before okay a few of you when you think
of a cave most do you think of a tunnel
going through solid rock in fact that's
how most caves are around this half of
the country most of your caves are made
of limestone back where I'm from
most of our caves are made of lava rock
because we have a lot of volcanoes out
there but the caves that want to share
with you today are made completely of
ice
specifically glacier ice that's form the
side of the tallest mountain in the
state of Oregon called Mount Hood now
Mount Hood's only one hour's drive from
Portland the largest city in Oregon
where over two million people live now
the most exciting thing for a cave
Explorer is to find a new cave and be
the first human to ever go into it the
second most exciting thing for a cave
Explorer is to be the first one to make
a map of a cave that these days with so
many people hiking around it's pretty
hard to find a new cave so you can
imagine how excited we were to find
three new caves within sight of Oregon's
largest city it realized that they had
never been explored or mapped before it
was kind of like being an astronaut
because we were getting to see things
and go places that no one had ever seen
or gone before so what is a glacier well
those who have ever seen or touched know
you know that it's really light because
it's just a bunch of tiny ice crystals
clumped together and it's mostly air if
you squash a handful of snow to make a
snowball it gets really small hard and
dense well on a mountain like hood where
it snows over 20 feet a year it crushes
the air out of it and gradually forms it
into hard blue ice now each year more
and more ice stacks up on top of it and
eventually gets so heavy that it starts
to slide down the mountain under its own
weight
forming a slow-moving river of ice when
an ice pack like that starts to move we
call it a glacier and we give it a name
the name of the glacier these caves are
formed is the sandy glacier now each
year as new snow lands on the glacier it
melts into summer Sun and it forms
little rivers of water on the flow along
the ice they start to melt and bore
their way down to the glacier forming
big networks of caves
is going all the way down to the
underlying bedrock the crazy thing about
glacier caves is that each year new
tunnels form different waterfalls pop up
or move around from place to place
inside the cave warm water from the top
of the ice is boring its way down and
warm air from below the mountain
actually rises up gets into the cave and
melts the ceilings back taller and
taller but the weirdest thing about
glacier caves that the entire cave is
moving because its form inside a block
of ice the size of a small city that's
slowly sliding down the mountain now
this is Brent McGregor my cave
exploration partner he and I both been
exploring caves a long time and we've
been climbing mountains a long time but
neither of us had ever really explored a
glacier cave before back in 2011
Brett saw a YouTube video of a couple of
hikers that stumbled across the entrance
to one of these caves there were no GPS
coordinates for it and all we knew is it
was somewhere out on the sandy glacier
so in July of that year we went out on
the glacier and we found a big crack in
the ice we had to build snow and ice
anchors so we could tie off ropes and
rappel down into the hole this is me
looking into the entrance crevasse at
the end of this hole we found a huge
tunnel going right up the mountain
underneath thousands of tons of glacier
ice we followed this cave back for about
a half mile until it came to an end and
then with the help of our survey tools
we made a three-dimensional map of the
cave on our way back out so how do you
map a cave well Kate maps aren't like
trail maps or road maps because they
have pits and holes going to overlapping
levels to make a cave map you have to
set up survey stations every few feet
inside the cave and you use a laser to
measure the distance between those
stations and you use a compass and an
inkling lammeter to measure the
direction that cave is headed and
measure the slope of the floor and the
ceilings now those of you taking
trigonometry that particular type of
math is very useful for making maps like
this because it allows you to measure
Heights and distances without actually
having to go there in fact the more I
mapped and studied caves the more useful
I found all that math I originally hated
in school to be so when you're done
surveying you take all this data you
punch it into a computer and you find
someone that can draw really well you
haven't draft up a map that looks
something like this
it'll show you both a bird's-eye view of
the passage as well as a profile view of
the passage kinda like an ant farm view
we named this cave snowdragon' cave
because it was like a big dragon
sleeping under the snow now later this
summer has more snow melted off the
glacier we found more caves and we
realized they were all connected not
long after we map snow dragon Brent
discovered this new cave not very far
away the inside of it was coated with
ice so we had to wear big spikes and our
feet called crampons so we could walk
around without slipping this cave was
amazing the ice in the ceiling was
glowing blue and green because the
sunlight from far above was shining
through the ice and lighting it all up
that we couldn't understand why this
cave was so much colder than snow dragon
until we got to the end and we found out
why there was a huge pit or shaft called
a Mullen going 130 feet straight up to
the surface of the glacier cold air from
the top of the mountain was flowing down
his hole blasting through the cave
freezing everything inside of it
that we were so excited about finding
these new pit we actually came back in
January the following year so we could
be the first ones to explore it it was
so cold outside we actually had to sleep
inside the cave there's our camp on the
left side of this entrance room the next
morning we climbed out of the cave and
hiked all the way to the top of the
glacier where we finally rigged and
repelled this pit for the very first
time
Brent named disc a pure imagination I
think because the beautiful sights we
saw in there were beyond what we could
have ever imagined so besides really
cool ice what else is inside these caves
well not too much lives in them because
they're so cold and the entrances
actually cover up with snow for about
eight months of the year but there are
some really cool things in there there's
weird bacteria living in the water that
actually eat and digest rocks to make
their own food to live under this ice in
fact this past summer scientists
collected samples of water and ice
specifically to see if things called
extremophiles tiny life forms that are
evolved to live in completely hostile
conditions might be living under the ice
kind of like what they hope to find on
the polar ice caps of Mars someday
another really cool thing is that a
seeds and birds land on the surface of
the glacier and die they get buried in
the snow and gradually become part of
the glacier sinking deep
deeper into the ice as these caves form
and melt their way up into the ice they
make these artifacts rain down from the
ceiling and fall to the cave floor where
we end up find them for example this is
a noble first seed we found it's been
frozen in ice for over 100 years and
it's just now starting to sprout this
mallard duck feather was found over
1,800 feet in the back of snow dragon
cave this duct died in the surface of
the glacier long long ago and his
feathers have finally made it down
through over a hundred feet of ice
before falling inside the cave and this
beautiful quartz crystal was also found
the back of snow dragon even now Brent
and I find it hard to believe that all
these discoveries were essentially in
our own backyard
hidden away just waiting to be found
like I said earlier the idea of
discovering his busy world we live in
can I see that something you can only do
with space travel now but that's not
true every year new caves get discovered
and no one has ever been in before so
it's actually not too late for one of
you to become a discovery yourself you'd
have to be willing to look and go where
people don't often go and focus your
eyes and your mind to recognize the
discovery when you see it because it
might be in your own backyard thank you
very much
you